Colony ship story idea: Gofer (novel)
# World
In the near future, the first colony ships are sent out to Mars. These carry hundreds of colonists in Long Sleep. Colonists are affluent, wealthy people looking for adventure or acclaim, and spots are very, very restrictive. These ships, however, are made as economically as possible, and tend to fall apart, requiring frequent maintenance. On the journey to Mars, the ship is maintained by a small number of Stewards, who, if selected, get to join the Sleepers, but have to stay awake for the months-long journey, tending to the ship, the sleepers, and, eventually, the colony. They get to go to Mars but are guaranteed to be a lower class: the Gofers and Fixers rather than the pioneers and trailblazers. Even still, the allure for these spots is strong, and the competition is high for the jobs.
The Long Sleep is a very nascent, difficult, and sensitive technology. It is difficult to keep passengers alive while they are in Long Sleep, and it’s extremely dangerous to put them to sleep or wake them up without the most careful precision and attentiveness. Because of the sensitivity of the procedure, it is near impossible to safely wake Sleepers while in spaceflight, hence the importance of Stewards.
Ship requirements differ based on landing location, population, budget, and any number of things, but, in general, a ship has around one Steward for every 30 passengers. A ship with five Stewards, such as the 132-passenger vessel in this story, would have jobs break down as follows:
Caller: effective leader of the group. Calls the shots. Often also has another role, usually Fixer.
Fixer: a ship’s mechanic. In transit, they stop the ship from falling apart, which it tries to do frequently and with conviction. On Mars, they tend to the life support and infrastructure of the colony.
Doctor: monitors the health of the passengers and works to maintain the long sleep, which is harder than it seems. Also usually has to fix the Fixers when the ship tries to fall apart on them, which it does frequently and with conviction.
Maker: gets supplies and infrastructure ready for the landing on Mars. They make sure there are no surprises waiting for the Sleepers like damaged equipment or a wrong landing site.
Gofer: lowest on the ladder, the Gofer works with whoever needs help at the moment, doing a bit of everything and picking up any slack. Often this means retrieving things or bringing things between Stewards, hence the name.
Part of the reason a Steward’s job is so awful is the hours. Even with five Stewards, keeping the ship (built by the lowest bidder) going is a big job. Luckily, the company has a solution. Much like how they made advancements in shutting a body down for the long sleep that colonists underwent, they also learned how to keep it awake unnaturally long, maintain alertness, and keep the workers energized and focused for their 100+ hour work weeks. The Juice is a drug that exists only to make Stewards more productive and cost-effective. Stewards hate the Juice, and only use it when needed, as determined by the Caller. Only the Caller is allowed to approve of or order a Steward to Juice. On an ideal journey, the Stewards never have to open the Juicebox. Psychological testing is important to rule out users getting side effects.
## Part 1
Aaron, a maintenance engineer for a struggling airline, is laid off as the company reorganizes in a last-ditch effort to not go under. Aaron has always been a learn-as-you-go kind of guy, lying his way into jobs he’s under-qualified for and faking it until he knows enough. Through this grift, he’s actually successfully learned a respectably broad set of skills, mostly in handiwork and mechanical maintenance. When he’s laid off, he thinks he’ll just look again and find something like before.
Unfortunately, this time, there’s even less work available than before. He can’t find a job that’s suitable. He even goes back to past employers, but finds no luck. He ends up taking shifts at his local bar and taking from his very limited savings to make ends meet while he looks around. The owner of the bar suggests Aaron works as a steward, something he’s joked about to Aaron many times before. Aaron usually handily rejects the idea, thinking the colonization project is stupid and economically wasteful. The bartender pushes the issue, talking Aaron into at least looking at the job.
Aaron investigates the company, and sees they’re hiring stewards for mechanical roles. As he looks into the position, he’s slowly convinced by the high salary, the comparatively easy return trip, and the likely ease of him getting the role (assuming he lies on his resume). He applies for the job.
Aaron gets chosen as a Steward and ships off on a colony ship. He doesn’t have much skill or technical experience, so he works as a Gofer. For a while, he’s able to get by, only occasionally quarreling with other Stewards and narrowly keeping his deception alive.
## Part 2
Aaron is selected to work on a mid-sized colony ship, the _Horologium_ (Aaron thinks this ship name is comical and stupid; Expedition wanted to name every ship for a constellation, but they made so many that they ran out of well-known ones and had to go more obscure for newer ships). He meets the crew of the ship who he’ll be working with:
- Caller: Tyler “West” Wesley, 60s, an old, well-experienced steward with a long career at Expedition since almost the very beginning. This is far from his first trip.
- Fixer: Jo Walton, late 20s, somewhat early in her stewardship career but very competent, abrasive and chronically angry. Believes very strongly in the mission of interplanetary humanity.
- Maker: Erica Klein, 40s, also new to steward work, starting over in a new career. Found herself unfulfilled in every career she had on Earth, thought maybe this could be something new.
- Doctor: Arnold “Dodge” Dodgson, 30s, a fairly experienced steward with a lot of competence around the long-sleep system. Apprehensive, just wants a quiet, easy trip with a lot of opportunity for solitude.
As the ship departs, Aaron realizes how limited his knowledge is. He struggles with his responsibilities, and narrowly avoids revealing his deception. He embarrasses himself in front of the others, and starts to catch Jo’s attention, who starts to resent him.
Aaron quickly befriends West, and, before long, confides in him about his deception. West respects him for it, feeling that learning on-the-job is the best way, and that, if Aaron wants it enough, he’ll make it happen. He recognizes aptitude in Aaron, and agrees to train him as much as he can.
As for the others, Aaron receives mixed receptions. Jo, who seems to hate everyone, dislikes Aaron, recognizing his incompetence and having no patience for it. Erica gets along with him, relieved to not be the only complete newbie on the ship. Dodge doesn’t really warm up to anyone, but doesn’t shy away, either.
Aaron does his best to tend to the ship, but he struggles against his inexperience, as well as his dislike for Jo. He tries to work off of the knowledge from his past mechanic work, but it’s not enough. Trying not to blow his cover, he starts to study up on the ship’s manuals and schematics in his very scarce free time to teach himself how to maintain it. It’s still not enough, though, and Aaron is overworked and starts to burn out. In a hail-Mary effort to get himself together, he decides to secretly Juice himself for a day or two.
With the drug, he has time to familiarize himself better with the ship manuals. He studies them and learns surprisingly quickly. He becomes competent in some basic repairs, and even starts to know more detailed specifics of the ship. He catches up on his work a little. He paces himself carefully, though, to not alert anyone.
Aaron butts heads frequently with Jo. Their personalities clash, and Aaron gets frustrated hiding now two deceptions from them. The other two spend a lot of effort keeping the two of them away from each other’s throat.
## Part 3
Suddenly, the ship’s Caller, West, is killed in an accident on the ship while performing maintenance about three weeks into the voyage. The remaining four Stewards do their best to divide up the work. The Fixer, Jo, an angry and stubborn person, decides that they should be the new Caller, and no one feels like arguing about it. West was also a Fixer, and he wasn’t a great delegator, so there is plenty more work to be done, and a lot of it naturally falls on the Gofer, Aaron.
As the workload increases, some repairs start to fall behind or get half-fixed. At a point where everyone is busy at once, an automated course correction takes place. As this happens, a small fairing (which was known to be damaged but which Aaron chose to ignore for now because it’s non-critical until landing) is knocked off, colliding with the radio antenna array. The ship is now cut off from both Earth’s and Mars’s infrastructure. The Stewards are on their own.
With the ship falling apart more and more without West’s help, Aaron eventually falls further behind in his work, getting overwhelmed. He starts to Juice himself more often. This helps him work much better, but he also gets a bit more cocky and confrontational, which doesn’t help his beef with Jo. He also starts to rush through his work, becoming careless and hurried.
The Maker and the Doctor are working on maintaining the Bunks that store the passengers and regulate the Long Sleep. The equipment is very finicky, since the Long Sleep has to be cautiously maintained: every variable has a Goldilocks range that must be meticulously maintained, or the passenger will die. One of the most important variables is temperature, which means that the ship has powerful heating and cooling systems with complex and precise control and ducting to maintain the temperature of the Bunks. While Mar and Deke work on these, there is a fault in a cooling line that bursts, immediately freezing and killing both the Maker and the Doctor, as well as 14 passengers.
Aaron and Jo are panicked as they do their best to patch the damage and save as many of the sleepers as they can, working through painful sprays of coolant, hammering the frozen hands and arms of the dead Stewards to get to the equipment, and fighting against the Juice. Once the situation is somewhat stabilized, Jo and Aaron argue. They don’t know how they’ll care for the ship with just them, and Jo suspects that the fault came from Aaron’s recklessness and lack of perfectionism, though he only implies it. They don’t have much time to argue before they have to fix the next problem.
The workload is overwhelming. The two do their best to keep up, but things fall apart. They start to take on a triage mentality, letting less critical things go in favor of the most important things. They rely on the Juice frequently, now working for about 40 hours on, 6 hours off. The ship is almost actively trying to fall apart on them, and the Juice is starting to affect them severely, making them manic, agitated, and quick to frustration.
A minor disagreement between them proves to be the final straw, exploding into a huge argument. Aaron says they should just stop, just give up and not spend their final days working themselves into dust. Jo says that Aaron is the main reason there are so many problems on the ship through his incompetence and failings, and outright blames every death that’s happened on the ship on Aaron. The conflict escalates, culminating in Aaron killing Jo with a sharp tool to the neck.
## Part 4
After the killing, Aaron experiences a brief clarity, realizing that Jo was right, and all the death aboard the ship was his fault. He falls apart with remorse: for killing Jo; for causing the deaths of the Maker and Doctor; for neglecting the care of the fourteen sleepers who were now dead; and for lying in the first place.
Aaron resolves to not let any more passengers die. The ship is in an awful state, worse than it has ever been, but Aaron doesn’t care. At this point, he has a singular goal of not letting anyone else die. He decides to start Juicing at all times to keep himself continually awake for the rest of the journey.
Aaron completely disappears into his work. He is nothing but a Steward now, fixing system after system, making repair after repair. Whenever he’s not actively working, he is reading the ship’s reference material and manuals, making sure he doesn’t make any mistakes out of ignorance. He entirely stops sleeping. He entirely loses track of the time, only occasionally checking to see how many days or weeks pass. He does not take a break. He does not rest. He eats while working and only when needed. There’s no shortage of Juice when it’s one person using a supply for five people.
As he works, he begins to experience psychological effects and hallucinations. He ruminates, jumping between resenting the Sleepers for ruining him and regretting his shortcomings that led to their inadequate care. He muses that he must be being punished for his personal failure, because no competent person would need to experience what he is experiencing. He curses himself, the Universe, the company that launched the ship, the Sleepers, Jo, and then himself again. He fights with, apologizes to, or cries with his visions of the dead Stewards, the dead Sleepers, or even visions of himself from before he was reliant on the Juice. He begins to acknowledge that he will probably never be able to stop using the Juice without dying, and he is probably going to die sooner than later anyway, judging by the toll it’s taking on him. He longs for any separation, any border to delineate the passing of time beyond the ship’s clock.
He compares himself to Sisyphus, but then decides that his lot is worse, because Sisyphus’s task wasn’t truly never-ending. Sisyphus’s task ended every day.
Through his determination, dissociation, and dependence on the Juice, Aaron keeps the ship together for the rest of the journey. The ship nears its destination, operating at the bare minimum of requirements for the upcoming deceleration burn and landing. Aaron, having now studied both the propulsion and the Long Sleep systems thoroughly, sets up complex computerized and mechanical systems to automate both. He debates when to have the Sleepers wake up. By procedure, they would be awoken once the ship is safely guided to landing by its Stewards and Mars control. However, he cannot land the ship on his own, and he can’t contact Mars control until they’re within its sphere of influence and can use the lower-power, short-range radio equipment from the landing supplies.
Aaron decides that he will rouse the Sleepers after the deceleration burn, as soon as the ship is in a stable enough orbit. Only then will he feel he accomplished his goal of keeping as many Sleepers alive as he can. He sets the Bunks and his automated systems up to rouse the Sleepers once that orbit is achieved. He goes into the landing supplies, which have been greatly picked through by Aaron for parts and material for salvage, and puts together the makeshift short-range radio, as well as leaves instructions on how to use it. He sets the antenna for the radio up at the fitting where the fairing fell off so many months ago, hoping that this fix will at least partially negate the failure that the lost fairing represents. He then prepares to decelerate the ship.
When the time for the hours-long deceleration burn comes, Aaron has triaged all available power and care to the three systems that matter at this point: propulsion, Long Sleep, and bare-minimum life support. He sits at the command center of the bridge (remarking that this is the first time he’s actually sat down in a chair in ages), monitoring the ship and his makeshift automation systems. The ship begins to decelerate. It’s a long, gradual burn, but, even still, the ship lurches, creaks, and complains as the massive machine is unwillingly slowed.
Aaron is on autopilot, issuing commands to his system, adjusting the ship’s throttle and steering, even controlling parts of the engines and generators with actual ropes and pulleys. As he does this, he thinks back on his journey, and thinks about what’s ahead. He lists in his head every failing and mistake he committed on the journey, and every success he’s made that keeps the Sleepers alive. He lists the names of the Sleepers he’s kept alive, as well as what he knows about them from their files and documents which he memorized. He lists the same for the Sleepers he’s killed. He lists each of the other Stewards, what he resented about them and what he appreciated about them, what made him hate them and what impressed him about them. He argues with himself over the reason he lied in the first place to get the Steward job. Did he want the novelty of the experience? Did he want the security of a guarantee that he’d have a bed, food, and a purpose, even if it cost him the work of the rest of his life? Did he just think that, if he was going to live at the bottom, it’s better to be at the bottom of Mars than Earth? He ruminates, judging himself and his actions, deciding whether he deserved punishment or not, or whether his experience as the last Steward on this ship counted as punishment enough. In the end, he decides that any crimes and wrongs he committed have been atoned for and reconciled for by his keeping every remaining Sleeper alive. He decides that he has redeemed himself through upholding his bargain with himself: don’t kill anyone else.
The ship completes its deceleration burn and arrives in the Martian sphere of influence. Aaron makes sure the ship’s planned burns for reaching orbit are still in place and attainable, and then goes to make preparations for the rousing of the Sleepers. As he heads down to the Bunks, he passes by the Juicebox. He looks at it, contemplating a decision.
Waiting for the ship are a small fleet of tug vessels, authorities, military ships, medical support ships, and commercial news ships. The colony ship may have lost contact long ago, but the trajectory was known, and the ship was able to be tracked as it approached Mars, once it was close enough. No one outside the ship knew what was going on. All they knew was that the Caller died unexpectedly, and then the ship went radio silent. No one knew whether the ship was hijacked or just damaged, whether anyone was alive on the ship at all, or whether the ship was safe to allow to land. As the ship enters its orbit, it is tethered to several tug vessels. Tender ships shuttle soldiers, medics, and mechanics over to the ship.
As control of the ship is taken by Mars authorities, Aaron sits back down at the command center, finally relaxing, his task finished. Even now, he can barely stop moving, and fidgets and shakes, not used to being still. He watches all the ships, big and small, whiz by through the command center’s window.
The Martian workers who board the ship find the Sleepers starting to be roused, the ship’s systems almost completely jury-rigged or bypassed or patched, and, eventually, the bodies of the Stewards and the Sleepers who died on the journey. They find the Juicebox, completely destroyed, the liquid drug still pooled around the crushed and crumpled cabinet. They try to speculate what happened, but can’t figure out anything.
Aaron sits, watching the reception, continuing to ruminate on his judgement of his actions, repeating to himself in his mind: you’ve been punished. You made up for it. You kept the bargain. You’ve done enough. They can take it from here. They are their own problem now. He notices that he starts to fidget less. Things seem to slow down. He wonders why the ships outside are all slowing down. He wonders why it takes so long for him to form his thoughts. He wonders why he can’t move. For the first time in long enough that he lost track, he feels tired. His eyelids droop and his posture slouches. Eventually, his eyes shut, and he finally rests. For the first time in months and the last time ever, he sleeps.